[sighs]
>> All right, guys. Small interruption. I'm
watching this video. What I'm giving you
is insanely beneficial for you guys.
This is something that took me years and
years to be able to learn, and I'm
giving it to you guys for free. I want
you to understand how valuable it is,
but it's missing something, and that is
guidance on how to program. So, what
I've decided to do is create a program
where one lucky winner gets to win 3
months worth of online customized
coaching by me. So, I'm going to build
your bench press as well as everything
else. Bench press, your whole body,
whatever your goals are, as long as the
bench press is included. So, all you
need to do is go to the description,
click on the link, and I'm going to send
you all of the details of how to enter.
You get to win 3 months of coaching with
me for the bench press, but everything
else. It's going to be a complete
program. This normally costs $2,000, and
it's yours for absolutely free. Click
the link, and I'm going to give you all
the details, and I'm going to see you
guys soon. Enjoy the rest of the video.
Trust me, I'm asking you for nothing in
return. This video teaches you how to
bench. Okay. Now, right now you're
behind the scenes of a new tutorial that
I'm making. You know, I'm a content
creator, and I'm an educator, and I've
given so many tutorials on the bench
press, but a lot of the times there's
new details that I deliver to you guys
based on the questions that I receive.
The technique has pretty much remained
the same since I really started
powerlifting, a little bit more than 10
years. I learned this bench press
technique from Kirill Sarychev. He was
once upon a time the best bencher in the
world with a 335 kg bench press, which
was the all-time world record.
Uh since then, he's been beaten. Julius
Maddox is the world record holder.
However, when we consider technique, I
prefer to use Kirill's technique. I
think that it's superior. Even though
it's like, "Well, how does Julius get a
better press?" I think Julius Maddox has
just got more raw strength. It's as
simple as that. You know, when you look
at the body weight, Julius Maddox
weighed over 440 lb. Some people say
even closer to 500 lb. I don't know the
exact weight, which is, you know, 200
kg, anywhere between 200 to 220 kg when
he set his world record, which I believe
is around 355 kg, somewhere around
there, over 750 lb, not quite 800.
That's the goal that everyone wants, but
uh of course, that's the that we're
chasing. When I say we, not me at all,
these guys. But, uh Kirill Sarychev was
170, low 170s, I think 172 kg when he
achieved that. Um so, I don't want to
take anything away from Julius Maddox
and do the pound-for-pound game, but you
definitely can consider it. Kirill
Sarychev was a lot lighter, and I'm sure
that if Kirill had more body weight on
him, uh he'd be stronger as well. Either
way, if I look at Julius Maddox's
technique, he's got a closer grip, he
doesn't arch as much, which I'm going to
explain a little bit in this video. But,
Kirill Sarychev has a wider grip. He
uses the same technique that I'm
teaching, which is index finger on the
outer ring of the powerlifting bar,
which is the maximum legal width in a
powerlifting competition. The leg drive
that he uses is the same, which is back
on the balls of the feet and pushing the
heels downwards in aid of creating hip
joint extension, which initiates the
arch to hold the body in the right
position from start to finish. So, I
learned that from Kirill Sarychev, but
the details that I provide uh
change, not because the techniques
change. It hasn't changed. I use
Kirill's technique, and I always have.
I've learned it from him. I've done work
with him many years ago. He came to
Iceland, and he did a seminar with Boris
Sheiko, and we spoke to him. You know, I
was in a hot seat because I was hanging
with Hafthor Björnsson, and Kirill was
there to do a WRPF. He's the president
of WRPF powerlifting competition, and uh
that's the federation that Hafthor
Björnsson competed in when he did a
powerlifting competition. He totaled
1,100 kg. So, we were hanging out with
Kirill. So, I had a lot of in-depth
discussion with Kirill. This is his
technique. It's not mine. I didn't make
it up. I just use it because I believe
it's the best technique for many
reasons, which I'm going to go into
great detail. Now, someone asked me on
my last, one of my last videos, um they
basically said in the comment section,
"I know that your audience is strongmen
and powerlifters at the elite level, um
but can you please make a video
explaining how this relates to everyday
people?" Somewhere along those lines.
Now, I want you to understand this does
relate to everyday people. Everything
that I do is for everyday people. The
reason why you see me using people like
Hafthor Björnsson, or even myself, I'm
not the best in the world, but I'm
pretty strong. I'm an elite-level
powerlifter, and this is me, 44 years
old, for a tutorial benching 160 kg for
three sets of five comfortably at 100 kg
body weight. The reason why I'm doing
this and maintaining my strength is
because as a business owner and
authority in the space, you could say, I
believe you need to be the walking
billboard for the product that you sell.
So, when I teach a technique, I like to
practice what I preach and show, "This
is what I'm using." I don't I didn't
just learn about this. I didn't read
about it from a textbook. I've learned
the ins and outs of these techniques and
applied it, not only on myself, but I've
applied it at the highest level to coach
some of the best athletes on the planet,
including who I consider to be the
strongest man on the planet. So, the
techniques work. That's why I use
examples of very, very strong people to
demonstrate that so that I can convince
all of you that it's the right
technique. Uh that's one of the biggest
problems with trying to figure out what
technique we should be using when we
train is there's so many different
authorities in the space. There's so
many different technicians, and there's
so many conflicting ideas. There's a lot
of coaches that say, "That person's
wrong, and that technique's bad, and my
technique is better." So, instead of
telling you that anything else is good
or bad or whatever, I'm teaching you by
showing you. I show you, and I lead by
example, as well as using the athletes
that I work with uh to demonstrate to
you that the techniques work. Okay? So,
that's why uh quite often, you know,
there's a saying, "Don't take advice
from people who haven't been down the
same path that you want to go down."
Okay? I know a lot of people might be
upset with with that, but anyway, it's
something that I believe in. So, I want
to practice what I preach. That's why I
use high-level athletes to demonstrate
that the techniques that I'm teaching
you, they work. Trust me. Use them. It's
going to make you better. I wish that I
had someone convincing me back then when
I was trying to figure out and I was
learning from all the different methods
and trying to figure out what's the best
way, and I was always chopping and
changing between techniques, and that's
not the best way to learn. The best way
to learn is to figure out the technique
that makes the most sense, that's most
comfortable for you, and stick to it for
a decade and more. You know, I say the
word decade implying long, long period
of time. You know, because if you're
changing, which is what I did in my
early years, if you're chopping and
changing between different techniques,
you're not giving giving anything a good
enough opportunity to actually get good
at it. So, this technique is good. Trust
me. Now, what I'm doing with this
tutorial is I'm going to go into great
depths. I'm going to talk about the
feet, the hands, the shoulders, and I'm
also going to talk about how it applies
to you even if you're not a powerlifter.
I'm an educator, and I host seminars
where I teach lifting technique. Now,
here's the thing. My main seminar, I
basically teach three lifts, squat,
bench press, deadlift, not because I
think, you know, everyone should learn
those movements, but because, you know,
in 1 day, how many techniques can you
possibly teach? There's thousands of
different amazing exercises. So, when I
say squat, bench, deadlift is what I'm
going to teach you, it doesn't mean I'm
[__] on other exercises and saying
that anything else is bad. I'm choosing
exercises that I believe have the best
carryover to learning how to do
everything else. So, I talk about the
bench press with the arch that I'm
teaching you guys right now as a push
pattern, a horizontal push pattern, but
if you understand how to master the
techniques that I'm teaching you here,
you're going to understand how to do a
push pattern with a flat dumbbell press,
an incline, an overhead, close grip, you
know, pronated grip, neutral grip,
supinated, whatever grip you want,
whatever angle you want, the pressing
position and the way that the shoulder
mechanics work in line with spine
position are all linked, not only with
the push pattern, but also with the pull
pattern. So, to demonstrate the
importance of this arch-back bench press
technique, I'm going to be using
vertical pull and horizontal pull
patterns like a lat pull-down and a
seated cable row so that you can
understand how the body is designed and
how the body should be moving when we're
performing natural human movements, our
push and pull patterns. Uh small
disclaimer, a bench press is an
unnatural human movement. It's not how
we're designed to push. Why? What do you
mean it's not how we're designed to
push? We are not designed to lay down on
a bench, which restricts our shoulder
blades from being able to move freely
when we do our human functions. What are
those human functions? A punch, a push,
a throw. Like, that's that horizontal
push plane. That's that action. So,
that's human movement. A bench press,
you're laying down on a bench with a
very, very heavy weight, heavy barbell,
which is man-made, in your hands, laying
on a bench, and the natural thing to
happen when I when my arm goes forward
and back is my shoulder blade should
protract when I come forward and retract
when I come back. But, that's not
completely possible when you're laying
on the bench, which is why you need to
understand bench press isn't human
movement. Okay? So, it's a technique,
and this is where things get a little
bit confusing. You've got a lot of, you
know, functional uh trainers that talk
about only do functional movements and
and whatever. I'll tell you now,
powerlifting is a sport. People want to
do a bench press. It's cool, it's fun,
and it's good for you when you do it
correctly, especially. It encourages
exercise, it encourages strength, it
encourages muscle building, and and
that's that. So, it's just like saying,
you know, tennis is not a natural human
movement. It's not. You're holding a
tennis racket, that's man-made. Golf is
not a natural human movement. It's
holding a man-made object. And when we
play these sports, which we love doing,
humans love competition, we need to
factor in the man-made components. Not
everything needs to be functional as you
think. So, either way, I am going to
show you non-functional, which is a
bench press. I'm going to explain
functional human movement so that I can
illustrate to you the do's and don'ts of
the bench press.
>> [snorts]
>> So, let's just start with the bench
press, shall we? So, I'm just going to
go Let's just go step by step with all
of the techniques that I'm doing. Um
Yeah, cool. So, this is what we're going
to do. We're showing you behind the
scenes. So, this is all This is probably
going to be 30- or 40-minute video
on YouTube, and we're going to show you
the final product, which is probably
going to be a 30- or 40-second video on
Instagram. I do everything for
Instagram, bro. That's where I live. You
know me. You know me.
You know, that's how I do everything is,
you know, I try and condense it. You
know, which comes with a whole list of
problems when you condense everything.
And this is what I'm talking about.
People I'll give the most in-depth
tutorial and and condense it into 60
seconds. And then people say, "But what
if this and what if that?" And and, you
know, there's so much detail that you
just can't explain in a short period of
time. So, therefore, that's why I've
decided to have Mr. Cameraman, Mustafa,
recording behind the scenes so that I
can explain the tight shots, the zoom
ins. So, I've just done the main work.
That's three sets of five of 160 kg.
That's kind of That's the so That's
called the social proof. So, this is the
strategy of social media. That's the
social proof. I don't need any of these.
Yes, I used So, these are very soft,
flimsy elbow sleeves. They're not
allowed in competition, but I love to
use these in training. It just makes me
warm and comfortable. The belt
is allowed in competition. It's a tool
that I like to use for many reasons. But
one of the big reasons is it increases
the rigidity of my torso. So, when I
hold my breath from start to finish,
which is what I do, it allows no
leakages from my leg drive to the power
output from my arms. So, when I'm
pushing down on my legs and pushing with
my hands, if I'm breathing and not
bracing correctly, the leg drive force
is being lost and not getting
transferred into my arm drive. So,
holding my breath and increasing the
tension in my core with the breath hold
and the help of my belt is going to
allow a lot more force production from
my leg drive to carry over to the amount
of weight that I'm pushing with my arms.
So, let's check it out bit by bit.
That's the first step. So, it's a funny
one because it's got nothing to do with
the press itself, but a lot of the times
when I'm teaching newbies how to do a
bench press, they just sit down and
they're getting excited and then they
whack their head on the barbell. Don't
do that. So, therefore, the first step
is sit at the edge of the bench so that
when you lay down, you are not going to
bump your head on the bar. Okay, sitting
at the edge of the bench. Now, what I
want to do is set myself up so I've got
the maximal arch all the way back here.
So, I don't just kind of lay down here
and then try and get in position. Okay,
so right now where my feet are, I'm not
maximizing my tension. What I like to do
is slide back before I set my feet up.
So, I don't know if you're able to see
or measure the spot that my feet were at
before I slid back here, but it wouldn't
have been as far back. When I slide back
and get my head off the bench, I'm able
to bring my feet even further back. What
I want to do is maximize
tension through my entire body. So, the
first thing I do is I slide back so my
head is See, it's off. So, don't just
slide a little bit. Slide all the way
back so your head is off the bench. I do
this so that I can bring my feet back up
on the balls of my feet, and then I push
my heels downwards towards the ground.
Notice they're not touching the ground.
I'm not telling you to touch the ground.
And yes, I know a lot of you in the
comment section are going to say, "But
in my federation, you have to have flat
feet." Yes, I know. We're going to get
to that. Right now, this isn't
necessarily about powerlifting
competition, even though it kind of is
because in my federation and Kirill's
federation, which is the person that I
learned it off, you are allowed to have
this technique. Correct? I know that
some federations don't allow it, which I
will get to. But either way, now a lot
of people ask the question, "How far
back should we go?" Here's the thing. I
go Let's just say we go all the way back
and we go a little bit too far. What
happens here is I push my heels down and
I can feel I can't go further because
I'm getting blocked. So, then I can
adjust my feet adjust my feet until I
get into the perfect spot. So, here,
this is the perfect spot. So, how do I
know I'm in the perfect spot? There's
two landmarks. One, sole of my foot when
I'm pushing down as hard as I can is 45°
or thereabouts. Okay, so that's what I
want is 45° with the sole of the foot.
The next landmark that I'm looking for
is barbell in line with your chin on
your mouth. Okay, so having the barbell
in line with the chin on my mouth means
that I don't have to reach back so far.
So, a lot of people teach in line with
the eyes, which is a few inches down
that way. And the further down there I
am, the more I need to reach my arms
back. The more I need to reach my arms
back, the more I'm taking my shoulder
blades into protraction to unrack that
weight. I don't want to do that. I want
to maintain retraction of my shoulder
blades. So, that was another point right
here. Feet back, heels down, and I pull
I squeeze my shoulder blades back and
down towards my back pockets, and I
stick them into the bench here. So, if
you notice how I'm doing it, I'm using
the grip of the bench. Some benches are
slippery, that's a disadvantage. I'm
using the grip of the bench to squeeze
my shoulder blades and stick them onto
the bench. Now, from here, heels down,
shoulder blades back and down, I've
chosen my grip, mouth in line with the
barbell, I take a big breath to brace,
and all I'm focusing on is heels down
and shoulder blades back and down.
That's the main thing that I'm focusing
on. From here, all I do after I unrack
is press the everything off the chest.
Okay, so you're going to watch me.
There's a few other details which I'll
go in, but from here, heels down,
shoulder blades back and down, big
breath to brace.
I did 10 reps to demonstrate that I held
my breath from start to finish. Okay?
So, that is not like a compulsory. Some
of you need to breathe, and a lot of you
are going to say, "That's bad for you."
Whatever. It's like, look, my
understanding of fainting, you know,
fact-check me if you like. I'm not a
doctor, so don't take my advice. But a
lot of the times when people faint is
because they need blood to the head. So,
what not to do when someone faints is
hold them up and stop them from lying on
the floor. That stops the blood from
getting to their head, and they're going
to stay fainted, passed out, or even
have some type of a seizure. Lay them
down flat so they get blood to their
head. That's my understanding, not
medical advice. When I'm lying down in a
bench press, you don't faint. I've never
seen it happen. I don't want to say it's
impossible. All I'm saying is I've never
seen it happen. I've seen people faint
from standing, from squatting and
holding their breath, from deadlifting
and holding their breath, from overhead
pressing and holding their breath
because you are vertical and the blood
can escape your head. But when you're
lying down horizontally, I've never seen
it happen. I don't want to say it's
completely safe to hold your breath like
that because if you have cardiovascular
issues, it could be a concern. So, that
tip, do that at your own risk. I don't
want to say it's going to kill you. I've
never seen it happen. Doesn't mean it's
impossible. But I'm not telling you I'm
not a doctor. Either way, all I'm
talking about isn't health. All I'm
talking about is the strongest position
for your bench press, and I hold my
breath from start to finish for that.
Now, some people lose their breath and
they need to breathe. If that's the
case, fine. Breathe. In a powerlifting
competition, all you've got to do is one
rep. So, you should be able to hold your
breath for that entire rep. That's the
strongest way to do it. If you have
cardiovascular issues, it's probably not
the safest way, but let's assume you
don't. Okay, now, that's pretty much
like
what I'm thinking about. Now, there's a
few other things that are going on
behind the scenes that I'm not really
talking about, but are naturally
happening. So, a few questions you might
have is, "What about bar path? What
about tucking your elbows? I haven't
heard you mention that." Well, the
reason I haven't mentioned it, but I'm
going to. But the reason why I haven't
mentioned it is because when you're in
the correct position, which is arching
your back, so that's called extension of
the thoracic spine. Lumbar spine is your
lower back. Thoracic spine is your upper
back. Every vertebra that's attached to
a rib is a thoracic vertebra. So, your
thoracic spine, so kind of here,
needs to be extended. That's the main
part. And as a result, the lumbar spine
or the lower back will also be extended
or arched. So, the objective is arch
your upper back as hard as you can. So,
feet back, heels down, arch your upper
back. Now, if you're in that position,
if you've arched your back maximally,
and you can do that at home. Head back
and tail back. Now, from here, where are
your shoulder blades? Where are your
shoulder blades? Answer the question.
I'll tell you where they are. They're
back and down towards your back pockets.
Did I ask you to put them there? No, I
didn't. It's just something that
naturally happens. When you extend your
spine, the scapula will move in a
corresponding way. So, arching the upper
back will cause the shoulder blades to
retract, and the opposite is true. When
I round or flex my upper back, the
shoulder blades will protract. So, this
is an important thing to understand with
human movement. When I arch my back, my
shoulder blades will naturally want to
come back and down here. The next thing
that will naturally want to happen is
when my shoulder blades retract, my
humerus will also naturally externally
rotate. Okay, so external rotation,
retraction of scapula, extension of
spine. Okay, so let's talk about that in
English. Arch your upper back, which is
extension of spine, externally rotate
your upper arm, which Look at the
direction my elbows are pointing when I
do that. They're pointing down. And when
I the elbows will tuck where they need
to go, which is a natural position. And
in my opinion, when I tell someone to
tuck their elbows, they exaggerate it
and they tuck it too much. You don't
want to tuck them too much, just right.
There is too little, there is too much,
you want that Goldilocks zone, just
right. The next thing is the bar path. I
don't need to teach you that. The bar,
think about straight up and straight
down. And what happens is, check this
out. See where my elbows are? The
barbell, so when I unrack, the bar's in
line with my shoulder. Now, when you
tuck the elbow, which naturally happens,
and you lower the weight, the bar is now
in line with the elbow, but it's not in
line with the shoulder anymore. So, we
forget the shoulder. The bar must be in
line with the elbow from start to
finish, okay? Now, if I'm tucking the
elbow, which will naturally happen, that
means the bar has gone from here and now
it's curved down to where my sternum is
and then back up again. So, I don't know
what you want to call that bar path,
diagonal-ish. I don't know if you call
that a J curve. I don't know what you
call that, but it's not. So, if I flare
my elbows completely, it'll be a
completely straight bar path, but I'm
not flaring the elbows, I'm slightly
tucking the elbows. So, therefore,
diagonal towards the sternum and then
diagonal up towards the shoulder. So,
it's a slight curve or diagonal bar path
and I don't need to tell you to do that
if you're moving correctly, okay? The
last part of that, so I said, when you
arch your back, that's paired with
retraction and depression of the
scapula, which is paired with external
rotation of your upper arm. The next
thing that ties that in is inhalation.
Okay? So, extension of the spine, so
this is a difference in brace between a
bench press and a deadlift and a squat.
So, when you squat and deadlift, we
teach the cue ribs down. Not sure if
you've heard that or not. If you
haven't, I'll talk about that on another
episode. But, when you brace correctly
with a spine loading exercise like a
squat or deadlift,
that's how you brace. It's ribs down.
When we arch in a bench press, the brace
isn't ribs down. I'm arching maximally
and it's flared ribs maximally, okay?
So, when I flare my ribs, so when I
inhale, that ties everything in. So,
inhalation ties in the flared ribs and
the extension of the spine, which means
exhalation
is the opposite of that. Exhalation will
cause my ribcage to depress. Depression
of the ribcage is flexion of the spine,
is protraction of the scapula, is out of
position in a bench press, which is why
I like to tie it in with the breath hold
from start to finish. Let's talk about
grip position.
I didn't know always hold the barbell in
the right place. I was actually taught
some wrong things, which is to grab the
bar and squeeze it as tight as you can.
Uh, cues like white knuckling the
barbell,
um, to allow you to engage your whole
body and to lift as strong as possible.
It's called the process of irradiation,
where you maximally contract one muscle
and the neighboring muscles will also
contract. Here's the thing, you don't
want every single muscle to maximally
contract. You only want the muscles that
are responsible for shifting the loads
to maximally contract and the others
don't need to be on to the same degree.
So, it's not about gripping the bar as
tight as possible, it's about placing
the barbell on the strongest part of
your hand. What is the strongest part of
your hand? It's where I'm resting right
now. So, this is where I'm placing all
of the load through at the heel of my
hand, which is in line with these two
bones in my forearm, which is the radius
and the ulna. Now, here's the problem.
That's the strongest grip. However, that
grip is not allowed in powerlifting
competition. This is called a false
grip. It's also called something else
starting with S, but for the algorithm,
you're not allowed to say those words.
Unaliving grip, we could call it for
now. However, the reason why it's not
allowed is because when I don't have my
thumb wrapped around the barbell, it's a
higher risk of the barbell slipping out
of my hands, which is why in not sure if
it's all federations, but I know the
main federations, that's not allowed. We
have to wrap the thumb around the
barbell in line with safety. So, the
strongest position to place a barbell on
your hand is in line with the heel of
your hand, which is in line with those
two forearm bones. It's stacked on those
joints. So, if you can imagine, if I
place the barbell higher up on my hand,
it's now putting a lot of pressure on my
wrist, which I don't want. Placing the
barbell on the heel of your hand, the
wrist will bend back, but it's totally
fine. Some people teach to have a
straight wrist position, incorrect. The
wrist won't be straight. You need for
some extension of the wrist to be able
to position the barbell in the palm of
your hand in the strong part. Now, what
is the strong part if it can't be
exactly on the heel of the hand?
Wrapping the thumb around, watch what
happens to my hand. So, that's the
strong part is on the heel of the hand.
When I wrap the thumb around, I need to
internally rotate my hand to be able to
position my thumb there. Now, when I
internally rotate my hand, I'm still
aligning the ulna, so this part of the
heel of my hand with the barbell.
I've just unaligned it from the radius.
So, it's in the webbing of your hand and
in line with the ulna. Okay? Now, this
isn't just the way that I do it. In
fact, this is I've actually got a cool
little video of Kirill Sarychev showing
me the exact position that he holds the
barbell when he bench presses 335 kg.
And it just so happened to be that exact
same position. Why don't you add the
video in now so that you can see it's
not just me, but I'm in good company as
well. Kirill, can you please just show
us
where you hold the barbell? The
position.
>> [music]
>> So, the wrist is bent back just a little
bit. Yeah, a little bit.
Here. Internally rotating the hands has
actually been given a name and that is
the bulldog grip. So, the bulldog stands
with his hands or hers
internally [snorts] right You know, you
got to be inclusive these days.
Internally rotated. So, that's uh, where
the similarities end. So, the hands are
internally rotated on a bulldog.
However, we're not bulldogs, we're
powerlifters and we need to still
position our shoulders correctly. So, we
internally rotate the hands to allow us
to wrap the thumb around the bar and
expose the strong part of the palm of
our hand to the barbell. But, I also
want my shoulder to be in the correct
position, which is external rotation.
So, internally rotating my hand,
externally rotating my shoulder and then
push the heavy thing off your chest.
That's all, okay? So, let's have a look
at all of that put together, step by
step. Step one, sit at the edge of the
bench so that you don't bump your head
on the bar when you lay down. Step two,
slide back so your head is off the bench
so that we can position our feet back.
Get on the balls of the feet and push
our heels down towards the ground.
They're not going to touch the ground,
but they're pushing down in that general
direction from start to finish. This is
called hip joint extension, which
initiates the arch.
From here, grab the barbell in your
desired powerlifting grip. For me, it's
index finger on the outer ring of the
powerlifting bar, but that's the maximum
legal width grip. Not for everyone, but
if that's you, then you do it now. You
hold the bar in your strong grip. From
here, with the heels down, I slide in
position until my chin or mouth or that
area is in line with the barbell
and I squeeze my shoulder blades. I grip
them in together, back and down towards
my back pockets while I'm pushing my
heels down the whole time. From here, I
take a big breath to brace
>> [sighs]
>> and then I go down and up and push the
heavy thing off my chest. Okay, now I'm
going to do all of that and show you how
I would modify that to do the flat foot
version for IPF powerlifting
competition. Uh, just so that you know,
I do pretty much the exact same thing,
except the last moment I slide my feet
forward. So, step by step, sit at the
edge of the bench,
slide back,
feet back. I still get you to set up
here because it positions your shoulder
blades where I want them, okay? Mouth in
line with barbell, squeeze the shoulder
blades into position. But then from
here, I slide my feet forward until
they're flat on the ground. Now, the way
that I drive my legs here is I push my
legs like I'm lifting my butt in the
air,
but then I lower my butt gently until
it's touching and I maintain that
pressure from start to finish.
So, that's the leg drive. Now, the
advantage of a leg drive that I do
compared to flat foot is when I drive my
legs down in a flat foot, my butt lifts
in the air. When my feet are back and my
heels are down, my pelvis rotates on
axis. It doesn't lift the hips in the
air.
Okay? So,
bringing my feet back and heels down, my
pelvis anteriorly rotates. When my feet
are flat,
I'm I'm trying to arch as much as I can,
but the leg drive forces my butt to lift
in the air, which is why in my opinion,
that's
one of the preferences with just gym
lifts.
Uh, if you were to choose a technique,
flat foot or up on the balls of the
feet, if you're not competing, that's
one of the reasons why I prefer to teach
up on the balls of the feet. Now,
remember, here's one error that I see
with people on the balls of their feet
is they look at that position and they
think you should be pushing through your
toes. No, don't push through your toes,
push your heels down. Different
mechanism, okay? So, if if you're just
like maximally contracting your calves,
it looks like you're doing the right
things.
Push the heels down. You want hip joint
extension. So, that's the objective
because that initiates that arch. I want
to talk to you about another detail,
which is un-racking, which is pretty
important because if you don't get this
right, going to ruin your set up and
you're taking yourself out of position
from the absolute beginning and that's
going to ruin the entire set. How can an
un-rack ruin your entire set? So, it's a
skill. So, when I un-rack, what you want
to do is be able to Now,
how can an un-rack ruin your entire set?
So, it's a skill. So, when I un-rack,
what you want to do is be able to
un-rack with the elbows, not the
shoulders, because if I un-rack with my
shoulders, which is a natural movement,
I'm going to take my shoulders out of
position. So, what I do is keep my
shoulders back and down and only unrack
with elbow joint extension, which is a
skill and it's a very unnatural skill to
learn. But, there's two ways of doing
that. One way is by yourself without an
unracker, which is what I just did the
entire session, which I don't like. I do
it and I think it's important to know
how to do because most people don't have
a training partner every single time
they train at the gym.
It's a luxury to have a training partner
and if you want to stick this out for as
long as you need to actually be good,
you are going to come to the gym many
times by yourself, which means learning
how to unrack the barbell without a
spotter is a skill that I highly
recommend you learn. However, it's also
important and a nice luxury to have if
you are lucky enough to have a great
training partner and an unracker. I do
have Musti, that's the videographer. He
is very good at unracking and he's only
not doing it now so that we can have a
very clear video. But, I might get him
to set up the camera so that we can show
you some of the things we're looking
for, the difference between self-unrack
and unracking with the training partner.
Okay, so let's get set up and I'm going
to show you a self-unrack.
Okay, so my self-unrack, what you want
to do
a lot of people teach the importance of
tucking the elbows. However, it's very
weak if you tuck the elbows from the
unrack, especially if you don't have a
spotter. So, if you are training by
yourself, you can't take that advice.
You need to flare the elbows to unrack
that weight. So, watch what I do. So,
I'm in the right setup from here. Now,
what I do is flare the elbows so that I
can get my elbow directly underneath
that bar.
From here, I'm still trying to maintain
my shoulder blade position, which is
back and down as best as possible. It
interferes with that slightly, but we've
got no choice. So, flaring the elbows so
that I can get the elbows under the bar
and just focus on elbow extension to get
the weight off the bar rather than
protracting my shoulder blade. Okay, so
keep my shoulder blades back, flare the
elbows, lock the elbow out, and then
externally rotate, and then press away.
Okay.
Now, I'm going to show you the
difference between that and having an
unracker. So, now when I have an
unracker, I let him do all the hard part
and what I want to do is maintain the
tuck. So, now instead of flaring the
elbows, I keep my elbows tucked and he,
my unracker, is going to gently unrack
that weight and I'm keeping my elbows in
the right position from start to finish.
And that is the optimal position
as long as your unracker is
has a good understanding of unracking
that weight. Now,
I'm going to explain
what your unracker needs to do.
So, check these things out. This is a
luxury that we have. This is called a
competition bench press and on a
competition bench press, you have these
competition stands, which is
a great position for the unracker to be
able to
grab that bar. Now, if you're in a
normal gym, a lot of gyms don't have
this. So, if you've got just a bench and
then you set up at a squat rack, you
know, like one one of these one of these
portable benches and you set it up on a
squat rack like here, you're on the
floor.
You're on the floor, right? And it's a
very bad position because you're further
down and your crotch is closer to your
training partner's face, which is very
unfortunate or fortunate, depends on how
you look at it. However, in competition,
we don't want any of that. So,
I'm going to show you comp style. So, we
have a rack that you may not have access
to. If you don't, my apologies. Standing
on the rack, something you have to
understand is either way, yeah, it's a
nicer position because I'm further away,
but still look at where the bench's face
is. That's unpleasant or pleasant,
depends how you look at it. Either way,
minimize that time. So, when the bench
presser is getting set up, if you're a
good spotter, good training partner, get
out of the way. Get your crotch out of
their face so they can set up.
Then, what you want to do is allow them
to position their body, wait for them to
do that. And what I like to do for the
unrack is I'll communicate with the
lifter
so that this is where the spotter, the
training partners need to be able to
communicate with each other. One thing
that I don't like is when people say, "3
2 1 up." So, when the benchers saying,
"3 2 1 up." or one to whatever you want
to say, "Ready, set, go." you're
exhaling. Exhale, exhale, exhale.
Therefore, out of position. I want you
inhaled.
That's the right position. So,
therefore, the way that I communicate
with the lifter
and I recommend that you communicate
with your spotter is to unrack the
weight the moment that the bencher, the
presser, the lifter has fully inhaled.
So, what I like to do is I get set up
and I'll go
The moment I close my mouth because I've
inhaled maximally, that's my signal to
the spotter that it's time to unrack.
Now, let's have a look at how to unrack.
What a lot of people try and do, this is
another error, is people try and be
polite and they do this awkward crotch
out thing and they poke their butt out
and they lift the bar this way. That's
not very strong. It's like doing a
deadlift with the barbell away from your
center of mass. It's weak. When you
deadlift, you want the barbell in line
with your midfoot. So, the same applies
here. This is the strongest position.
Barbell in line with the midfoot. So,
I've actually got some of the best
unracker's in the world and one of those
is my little sister-in-law, Dinny Jay.
She's 52 kg
and she has spotted me for 200 kg bench
press fail
because she knows what she's doing and
that is to keep the bar She's 160 kg
deadlifter, mind you. But, either way,
she's quite strong. But, she doesn't
have to be able to lift 200 kg to spot
200 kg because, of course, I'm lifting
that as well. What she needs to know how
to do or what your spotting partner,
your training partner needs to know how
to do is to position themselves in the
strongest position, which is
thighs pretty much like almost touching
the barbell so the barbell's in line
with your midfoot. Same rules for a
strong deadlift.
Now, this is the unrack position, which
you don't want to I've been standing
here for a long time explaining that to
you. Don't do that to your training
partner. It's unpleasant for them or
pleasant, depends how you look at it.
So, what you want to do, once they're
ready, get in position,
barbell in line with midfoot.
A very simple way of thinking about it
is have your thighs touching the bar.
From here,
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> the rack height is pretty important for
the lifter. What I don't want to do,
like I want to take a lot of the weight
off the lifter so that they can just
focus on maintaining position, but in
order to do that, I don't need to take
them out of position.
Jesus. Yeah, lots of airplanes.
Okay, so all I want to do is lift the
weight enough.
See how I'm doing it? I'm lifting it
enough so it clears
Can you see that rack? Can you see the
lip? Okay, all I need to do is clear
that lip. It's
All I'm doing is unracking this much,
which is where you're not taking the
lifter out of position. You're lifting
the barbell just enough to clear the
rack, but not so much that it takes the
lifter out of position. Why don't we do
this, Musti? Why don't we show how not
to do it? Yeah, how not to do it and how
to do it. Okay?
Well, let's go how to do it
and then let's go how not to do it.
Now, Musti's going to stand back. Let me
get in position
without his crotch in my face.
Okay, now from here, he sees that I'm in
position. Now, he's going to do it the
correct way.
Okay, so that was very seamless. Now,
he's going to do it the incorrect way.
[__]
Okay, [laughter]
so
So, of course, that was exaggerated and
I think that I'm going through
so many details of the bench press that
if I give more, it's going to be
overkill, but I bet you
someone is going to write in the
comments, "But, what about this?"
Anyway,
anyway, what we're going to do is I'm
going to show you how that carries over.
So,
so for the question that I had, you
know, saying, "I know this applies to
powerlifters and strong men at elite
level, how does it apply to general
population?" This applies to general
population. If you are a beginner, my
daughter, I teach her this technique
because I want her to learn how to move
and it's a great way of pressing. And
the beginner can can do it and advanced
can do it. Everyone can do it. All the
techniques that I teach applies from all
levels. The difference is how much
weight you lift. Okay, a beginner
obviously doesn't lift as heavy a
weight. Now, let's have a look at how
this applies to the pull pattern. So,
I'm going to show you a vertical pull,
which I really like. So, when I'm
teaching someone the bench press, as I'm
warming up for the bench, I'll do a set
of bench press and then I'll come and
I'll do a set of lat pull-downs. The
reason why I like to pair it with a lat
pull-down, so a bench press is a
horizontal push, but a lat pull-down is
a vertical pull plane.
So, why do I A lot of people like to
superset and they do a horizontal push
with a horizontal pull? I like to pair
it with a vertical pull because one of
the details of shoulder blade
positioning that's important in the
bench press is the that the vertical
plane of scapula positioning. So, this
is called scapula depression. Okay, so
something that I try and look for with
all of these exercises, a cue that you
can consider is increase the distance
between your shoulders and your ears.
So, what does that mean? Incorrect
technique here, so this is elevating the
shoulders, that's wrong technique. I
want depression. Okay, so depression of
the scapula. So, I like to superset the
bench press with the lat pull-down
because the lat pull-down, the bottom
position of the lat pull down is the
exact position that I want to be in from
bench press from start to finish, which
is check this out. So, have a look at
everything that I'm doing. It's arching
my upper back, my shoulder blades are
back and down, the distance between my
shoulders and ears is as much as
possible. So, shoulders back and down,
extension of the spine. That's the
position that I'm in. So, check it out.
So, from here
that's where I want you.
Okay, so let's do it again. Here.
Hold that position.
Bench press, same position. Same
position as the bottom position of a lat
pull down. So, let's have a look at
everything that's happening. Let's have
a look at incorrect technique with a lat
pull down is
rounding your upper back. So, this is
what a lot of people do and that's how a
lot of people incorrectly bench press
with a flat back and protracted
scapulas. That's what their shoulders
look like, which is out of position if
your objective is to shift the heaviest
load. So, this
one of the muscles that I want to target
in a lat pull down is my mid back
muscles. The only time the mid back
muscles are on is if you see the
shoulder blades coming in and down. So,
the mid if the shoulder blades don't
move in and down, those mid back muscles
aren't working. Some of you might say,
"Well, that's the objective of a lat
pull down. I only want to train my
lats." True, you can do a pure
lat focused lat pull down, which is
where I'm not focusing on pulling my
shoulder blades back and down. So, yes,
that's correct. However,
this is the one that I want to teach you
in relation to the correct shoulder
position for the bench press.
From a full stretch to shoulders back
and down and arch, so chest sternum up
high. Full stretch. This is the
position. So, if you are learning your
bench press, super set a lat pull down
with this position, shoulders back and
down, super set back and forth and it's
going to help give you a better
understanding of how to push with the
bench press.
There's a lot there, bro. Lot there,
bro. Isn't there?
All right.
>> [snorts]
[clears throat]
>> Last but not least, seated cable row.
The grips that I've used are irrelevant.
So, I've got, you know, kind of
neutralish grips here. It doesn't matter
if you go pronated, neutral, supinated,
whatever. I'm not demonstrating the
wrist position. I'm demonstrating what I
want from the shoulders and how it all
relates. So, I'll teach you correct form
with the seated cable row. What I always
want to do with my head exercises is
full range of motion. Now, this is
natural human movement. Remember what I
said with the bench press. It's not
natural human movement because you're
laying on a board, which restricts your
scapulas or your shoulder blades from
moving freely. But, when we are doing a
row, our shoulder blades are free to
move in space. Same applies with a
push-up, actually. A push-up allowing us
to move our shoulders and perform the
press action or the push pattern
correctly with nothing restricting our
shoulder blades from moving. So, you can
protract your shoulder blades when
you're doing a push-up.
But, a bench press, you don't want to do
that. Now, let's have a look at the
rules here.
Have a look at the impact that my
thoracic spine, so my upper back
position has on my shoulder blade
position.
When I'm arching the whole time, look at
my shoulder blades. They're back.
Okay, so I'm at the like I'm fully
locked out, but because I'm arching so
hard, it's hard for me to protract my my
scapula. Okay, so this is where in a
seated cable row, I don't recommend you
too rigid like this. So, this is what a
lot of people try and do to have really
good technique in a seated cable row.
You're not taking your middle back
muscles to their full stretch. To allow
your rhomboids and trapezius to go from
a full length and position, you need
protraction of the scapula,
which is paired with flexion of the
thoracic spine, which means rounding of
the upper back. So, have a look at my
upper back. I'm rounding forward to get
full range of motion in the mid back
muscles and protraction of the scapula
and I'm extending to get full retraction
of the scapula and a full contraction of
my mid back muscles. Protraction is
paired with flexion. Retraction is
paired with extension.
Flexion, extension.
Protraction, retraction. Full stretch of
mid back muscles, full contraction of
mid back muscles. So, I'm while I'm
doing this,
I'm maintaining a rigid lower back. So,
I'm not doing this. This is legs and
hips. That's kind of cheating. That's
creating momentum. That's not what I
want to do. I want to maintain a rigid
core, but allow for thoracic flexion and
extension to get full range of motion in
those mid back muscles.
Well,
and if you know how to move the
shoulders and thoracic spine with those
three movements, comp bench, seated
cable row,
and a lat pull down,
>> [sighs]
>> there's not really a single exercise in
the upper body that you won't have the
coordination to be able to do. So,
that's why in my courses, I emphasize
the education on a powerlifting style
bench press. If you know how to perform
the powerlifting style bench press
and those pull patterns, of course,
you'll know how to do absolutely
everything. Anyway,
man, that was an in-depth discussion on
the powerlifting style bench press as
practiced by the best benchers in the
world and you know all of this for free.
This took me decades to learn this.
I want you to understand something. When
people give stuff away for free,
people don't listen to it because I go,
"Oh, it's free, so it's no value."
No.
>> [sighs]
>> This is valuable. No, I should charge
for this. In fact, I do with my
seminars. I charge a lot of money for
this.
I charge a lot of money for this and
it's yours for free.
Please use it. Please use it.
I've taken the guesswork out of it for
you. Use it.
Stick to it for 10 years. Watch your
bench press. You're welcome. How many
sessions a week? Two sessions a week.
Hope you listen. Hope you enjoy it.
Um and I hope you like this style of
content. This is raw, behind the scenes.
>> [sighs]
>> I would like to say unedited, but you're
going to edit the boring [__] out. Not
much. Not much. This is [__] free
form. Free form. Check the Instagram as
well. Yeah, go check the Instagram. You
know what we might do as well?
Post the final product on Instagram.
Yeah.
So, they can see the 10-step tutorial at
the end. Anyway,
all right, I'm going to eat lunch. I've
been talking for a long time.
Long time, just for you guys.
>> [sighs]
>> See you guys.